package_policies/M1.md, before:

**M1.** Each xSDK-compatible package must support portable installation through Spack.

All configuration, build, and installation phases must be specified in a [Spack](https://spack.io/)
package recipe.

Packages should have a build system that is appropriate for the language (e.g.~ CMake, Autoconf, setup.py), and the packages should attempt to follow the best practices and guidelines of the respective environment. For example, a proper configuration phase should be used where relevant (a list of platform specific makefiles would not be acceptable).

The package should provide Spack variants compliant with the [xSDK Spack variant guidelines](../installation_policies/xSDK_spack_variant_guidelines.md).

Packages must not override Spack's resolved dependencies (as determined by `spack spec`). For example, if a BLAS library is part of the concretized `spack spec`, a package cannot silently substitute a different BLAS implementation.

The goal of this policy is to enable easy and customizable installation of the package in a way that is compatible with other xSDK packages on the same system.

Commit message:

Add smoke testing line to M1

package_policies/M1.md, after:

**M1.** Each xSDK-compatible package must support portable installation through Spack.

All configuration, build, and installation phases must be specified in a [Spack](https://spack.io/)
package recipe.

Packages should have a build system that is appropriate for the language (e.g.~ CMake, Autoconf, setup.py), and the packages should attempt to follow the best practices and guidelines of the respective environment. For example, a proper configuration phase should be used where relevant (a list of platform specific makefiles would not be acceptable). Packages should also have a mechanism for 'smoke' testing (e.g. make test_install).

The package should provide Spack variants compliant with the [xSDK Spack variant guidelines](../installation_policies/xSDK_spack_variant_guidelines.md).

Packages must not override Spack's resolved dependencies (as determined by `spack spec`). For example, if a BLAS library is part of the concretized `spack spec`, a package cannot silently substitute a different BLAS implementation.

The goal of this policy is to enable easy and customizable installation of the package in a way that is compatible with other xSDK packages on the same system.
