3. Select compilers (NOTE: Packages must support using the MPI compiler wrappers for these arguments.) and compiler flags.

    1. If the compilers (and or flags) are explicitly set on input, use those:

        1. `CC=<cc>`,  `CXX=<cxx>`,  `FC=<fc>`,  `CPP`, `FFLAGS`, `FCFLAGS`, `CFLAGS`, `CXXFLAGS`, `CPPFLAGS`, `LDFLAGS`

        2. `CMAKE_C_COMPILER=<cc>`, `CMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=<cxx>`, `CMAKE_Fortran_COMPILER=<fc>`, `CMAKE_C_FLAGS="<flag1> <flag2> ...”`, `CMAKE_CXX_FLAGS=”...”`, `CMAKE_Fortran_FLAGS=”...”`

    2. If the compilers and/or flags are not explicitly set on input but are set in the environment variables `FC`, `CC`, `CXX`, 
    `CPP` (NOTE: The environment variable CPP is not supported by raw CMake.), `FFLAGS`, `FCFLAGS`, `CFLAGS`, `CXXFLAGS`, `CPPFLAGS` 
    (NOTE: The environmental variable CPPFLAGS is not supported by raw CMake.), LDFLAGS, then the compilers and flags must 
    be set to these.  If both FFLAGS and FCFLAGS are set, then they need to be the same or it is an error.

    3. If the compilers and/or compiler flags are not explicitly passed in or defined in the environment variables listed 
    above, then the package is free to try to find compilers on the system and set the compiler flags consistent with the 
    other settings defined below (e.g., shared libraries vs. static libraries, debug vs. non-debug). (NOTE:  All CMake 
    projects should use the same built-in CMake algorithm to find the default compilers, so even when no explicit compilers 
    or flags are set they should use the same compilers and flags.  Also, raw CMake projects will append compiler flags based 
    on the build type.  See "Selecting compiler and linker options".)
